Documentation: Data Warehouse What/Why (#1175)
alphagov/content-performance-manager: doc/data-warehouse-what-and-why.md

<!-- markdown-toc start - Don't edit this section. Run M-x markdown-toc-refresh-toc -->
**Table of Contents**

- [The need for a Data Warehouse](#the-need-for-a-data-warehouse)
    - [Long term vision](#long-term-vision)
    - [Give departments the data they need](#give-departments-the-data-they-need)
    - [At scale and over time](#at-scale-and-over-time)
        - [Example 1: Number of Content Items published by an organization](#example-1-number-of-content-items-published-by-an-organization)
        - [Example 2: Enforcing good practices](#example-2-enforcing-good-practices)
        - [Example 3: Predictions](#example-3-predictions)
- [Why a Data Warehouse](#why-a-data-warehouse)
    - [Overview](#overview)
    - [Track content changes over time for Content Items](#track-content-changes-over-time-for-content-items)
    - [A new application for GOV.UK?](#a-new-application-for-govuk)

<!-- markdown-toc end -->

> # The need for a Data Warehouse

Reviewer: Is this the right title for the section? Because the following sentence is spent clarifying it. It seems that this section is more about the overall project goals and aims.

Author: I have tweaked titles and structure:

```
- [The need for tracking metrics through time](#the-need-for-tracking-metrics-through-time)
    - [Long term vision](#long-term-vision)
    - [Give departments the data they need](#give-departments-the-data-they-need)
    - [At scale and over time](#at-scale-and-over-time)
        - [Example 1: Number of Content Items published by an organization](#example-1-number-of-content-items-published-by-an-organization)
        - [Example 2: Enforcing good practices](#example-2-enforcing-good-practices)
        - [Example 3: Predictions](#example-3-predictions)
- [Why a Data Warehouse](#why-a-data-warehouse)
    - [State of the art](#state-of-the-art)
    - [Tracking metrics through time in a Data Warehouse](#tracking-metrics-through-time-in-a-data-warehouse)
    - [Track content changes over time for Content Items](#track-content-changes-over-time-for-content-items)
```

> This document is not an in-depth explanation of what is Data Warehouse but an

Reviewer 2: I think the following substitution would read better:
`explanation of what a Data Warehouse is but an`
`explanation of what is Data Warehouse but an`

explanation of the reasons behind building it. There are many online resources
and books about Data Warehouses if you want to get further information about
this matter.

To understand the foundation for the Data Warehouse, let's start with the `long
term vision` that guided our work.

##  Long term vision

```
Give departments the data they need, at the point they need it so that they can
manage their GOV.UK content at scale over time.
```

Let's explore in detail:

## Give departments the data they need

Departments manage content daily. They publish, update and archive content as

> part of their daily work; as of today, content designers don't have a single

Reviewer: `content designers don't have a single place to get metrics about how their content is performing.` reads like content designers can't currently get any metrics. 

maybe something like -
`content designers have to search across multiple sources or tools to find metrics. Some of these sources are inaccessible, difficult to use or require further analysis. The aim of the Data Warehouse is to provide a single location for content designers to see all relevant metrics about their content.`

place to get metrics about how their content is performing. This information is
beneficial to make informed decisions about their next steps.

As per user research, content designers would benefit from having two types of
metrics.

* Metrics about **content performance**:

```

> Metrics that define how content behaves when it interacts with GOV.UK users. For

Reviewer 2: How about reversing this, so:
`Metrics that define how users behave when they interacts with GOV.UK content`

Unless your intent was indeed to anthropomorphise the GOV.UK content?

passive voice, guidelines compliance, number of paragraphs, words, complex sentences,...
```

## At scale and over time

`At scale` and `over time` key principles for the Data Warehouse, because
content designers are interested in:

1. Metrics for each content item that is or have been live in GOV.UK (around
   550K)
2. Trends of each of the metrics **over time**

To explain in detail why **over time** is important, let us explore three simple
examples.

### Example 1: Number of Content Items published by an organization

Departments are content owners; this means that they are responsible for
publishing, updating and archiving/retiring their content daily. Diligent
management of content implies a steady pace of updates and publications while
keeping the total number of content items in a sensible number.

For example, if an organization is publishing at a very high rate for an
extended period of time, it could be a signal that they need to improve the way
they archive or retire existing content.

To get these insights about content publication we can't focus on metrics for a
single day, we need to understand how those metrics evolved through time; we

> need to explore metrics **over time**.

Reviewer: we need to understand how those metrics evolved ~~through time; we need to explore metrics~~ **over time**.

Feels like this sentence repeats itself.

Let's explore the example:

* **Content Items published by an organization in one day**

We have two organizations: `A` and `B`. In the last day, `Organisation A` has
`550` live Content Items and `Organisation B` has `400`.

With this information, it is not easy to say if any of those organization are
not doing good management of their content because we only have a metric on a

> particular day of the year.

Reviewer: With this information, it is hard to see if those organizations are effectively managing their content because we only have a data points for a single day.

![without metrics over time][figure-1-no-trends]

* **Content Items published by an organization over time***

> If we track the number of content items **over time**, then we observe that

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If we track the number of content items **over time**, then we might observe that
```
Just to make it obvious it's a hypothetical.

`Organisation A` is decreasing the number of Content Items daily, and
`Organisation B` has created too many content items in the last year.

We can conclude that `organization b` would need to take action to improve the
way they manage content over time: they can make an informed decision based on
data about the way they manage content.

![with metrics over time][figure-2-with-trends]

### Example 2: Enforcing good practices

Data is not only to help departments to manage their content over time; it can

> also help to provide evidence about best practices and guidelines compliance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
also help to provide evidence about compliance to best practices and guidelines.
```

For example, we discourage Departments from publishing content in PDF format.
There are many reasons for it, but having some metrics to prove it would shorten
the distance between the GOV.UK Guidelines and Department practices when

> publishing content.

Reviewer: I think department and guidelines don't need to be capitalised. 

Not really sure what "shorten the distance" means?

Reviewer: No no, the English is fine! Sorry, I should say I don't understand the point made by the whole sentence:

having some metrics to prove it would **shorten the distance** between the GOV.UK Guidelines and Department practices when publishing content

i.e what **_is_** shortening the distance GOV.UK Guidelines and Departments?

Author: I have updated it to:

```
For example, we discourage departments from publishing content in PDF format.
There are many reasons for it, but having some metrics to prove that PDFs are
not benefitial for users, would make it easier for departments to fully comply
with GOV.UK guidelines.
```

In the following example, we can see how there is a relationship between the
number of PDFs published by `Organisation A` and the `satisfaction score`.

![enforcing good practices][figure-3-comparisons]

### Example 3: Predictions

In our domain, as per the nature of the information that we share in GOV.UK,

> some user interactions follow seasonal patterns. If on a particular week or

Reviewer: In our domain, as per the nature of the information that we share in GOV.UK, some user interactions follow seasonal patterns.

Could be simplified to:

User interactions with content on GOV.UK can sometimes follow seasonal patterns.

month of the year a set of pages receive a spike on the number of visits, it is
very likely that the following year, on the same period, those pages will

> receive at least, a similar number of visits.

Reviewer: it is very likely that the following year, on the same period, those pages will receive at least, a similar number of visits.

could be simplified to ~

it is possible those pages will receive a similar number of visits following year during the same period.

Let's explore the following example:

As per the spike of visits in June last year, it is very likely that
`Organisation A` expects a spike in page views for a content item, so they might

> consider reviewing in advance the content, so it is accurate and up to date.

Reviewer: Could we merge the this with the example above? They are very similar.

Reviewer: Sorry I mean the two paragraphs with `Predictions`. 

If feel you could add to the first paragraph and delete the rest without losing meaning
```
User interactions with content on GOV.UK can sometimes follow seasonal patterns. If on a particular week or month of the year a set of pages receive a spike on the number of visits, it is possible those pages will receive a similar number of visits the following year during the same period. Organisations might consider reviewing this content in advance, so it is accurate and up to date.
```

Author: The second paragraph is the explanation of the example (the spike is in June) I would rather leaving it as it is, to be honest.

![predictions][figure-4-predictions]

# Why a Data Warehouse

Now that we have a better understanding of the needs behind tracking metrics at
scale and through time, let's explore why we have chosen a Data Warehouse as the
underlying technology to support this functionality.

## Overview

> Considering then user needs, and the long term vision, it seems that what we

Reviewer: Shorten to
```suggestion
Considering the user needs and the long term vision we need:
```

We get:

```text
A central repository of integrated data from Feedex, Google Analytics, PAAS...,
that stores current and historical data in one single place that is used for
creating analytical reports for content designers throughout all GOV.UK
organizations.
```

So, it seems that from a definition / formal perspective, it fits in what we
need to track metrics through time.

## Track content changes over time for Content Items

We not only need to track metrics about how content is performing through time,
but we also need to monitor the content attributes, so we understand the
relationship between content and performance changes through time.

Say, for example, that a content item was created and published three years ago.
To get a good understanding of how the content changes are related to their
performance, we would need to:

1. Track each change to the Content Item through the three years
2. Update the quality metrics each time a new version is created
3. Link the performance metrics to each one of the versions of the Content Item.

Tracking the history of each content item is key to understand the relationship
between content and performance.

> ## A new application for GOV.UK?

Reviewer: I don't understand this heading in the context of this `Why a Data Warehouse`.

Reviewer: I assume this section is about - why build a new application within GOV.UK?

Author: I have renamed this section to State of the art and remove a couple of paragraphs

With this context, we decided to build a new application for GOV.UK, a Data
Warehouse that will track content and performance changes through time and that
will enable other applications within GOV.UK to get the most of this
information.

Before building the application, we first checked for the state of the art of
all the different products within GOV.UK checking if we could re-use some of

> this information, so we don't reinvent the wheel.

Reviewer: The point made by this paragraph isn't clear - was it that we tried integrating the Data Warehouse within an existing product in GOV.UK?

Author: I have deleted this paragraph as it would need a deep explanation to be totally clear.

This is what we found out:

1. We don't have a single place to retrieve all metrics for content items. We
   currently store metrics for organizations (and dashboards) via the

>    performance platform, but the way it is structured and the scope of the

Reviewer: whats the performance platform?

Author: I have added a link to the project

   product, make it not a good fit for our mission goal.

1. We store the number of page views in [Search][rummager], so when users search
   in GOV.UK the results are ordered by popularity; the way this information is
   collected [has been reported as Tech debt][ga-tech-debug-trello] and building

>    this applpcation will enable [Search][rummager] to use the API and pay the

Reviewer: `to use the API` - to use which API? This is the first mention of an "API", and I assume you are talking about content-performance-manager, but this won't be clear for people unfamiliar with the project.

Author: I have added a link to the API documentation. Once the application is renamed to `content-data-api` I guess it will be more clear for developer how the product shares information.

   tech debt.

1. Data Scientists find it difficult to get and link content and performance
   metrics. Having a single place to look for this information will make their
   daily work easier.

1. Performance Analysts dashboards will also benefit from having metrics from
   multiple sources because, although they have direct access to metrics from
   Google Analytics, they don't have direct access to Feedex or other internal
   applications.

In summary, we looked at the main applications in GOV.UK ([Content
Store][content-store],[Publishing API][publishing-api],[Rummager][rummager]),
and we couldn't find a way to provide the information that we needed to fulfill
the mission goals. As a side benefit, by satisfying the mission goals, we also

> find out that we were making GOV.UK suite of applications richer.

Reviewer: Think the last sentence could be clearer / the point it is making isn't very strong.

Author: I have deleted the last paragraph. It would need further explanation to make it clear for everyone.

Reviewer: Yup - sorry I meant this sentence
```
As a side benefit, by satisfying the mission goals, we also find out that we were making GOV.UK suite of applications richer
```

Author: Yeah, I forgot to remove this paragraph. I have just deleted it.

        - [Example 2: Enforcing good practices](#example-2-enforcing-good-practices)
        - [Example 3: Predictions](#example-3-predictions)
- [Why a Data Warehouse](#why-a-data-warehouse)
    - [State of the art](#state-of-the-art)
    - [Tracking metrics through time in a Data Warehouse](#tracking-metrics-through-time-in-a-data-warehouse)
    - [Track content changes over time for Content Items](#track-content-changes-over-time-for-content-items)

<!-- markdown-toc end -->

```
This document is not an in-depth explanation of what Data Warehouse is but an
explanation of the reasons behind building it. There are many online resources
and books about Data Warehouses if you want to get further information about
this matter.
```

# The need for tracking metrics through time

To understand the foundation for the Data Warehouse, let's start with the `long
term vision` that guided our work.

##  Long term vision

```
Give departments the data they need, at the point they need it so that they can
manage their GOV.UK content at scale over time.
```

Let's explore in detail:

## Give departments the data they need

> departments manage content daily. They publish, update and archive content as

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Departments manage content daily. They publish, update and archive content as
```

steps.

As per user research, content designers would benefit from having two types of
metrics.

* Metrics about **content performance**:

```
Metrics that define how content behaves when it interacts with GOV.UK users. For
example, the number of visits, the number of searches within the page, the
number of feedback comments that a page is receiving, or the overall
satisfaction with a particular page.
```

These metrics are tracked daily.

* Metrics about **content quality**:

These metrics are tracked/updated on each new version.

```
Metrics that define core characteristics of content: the reading score, use of
passive voice, guidelines compliance, number of paragraphs, words, complex sentences,...
```

## At scale and over time

`At scale` and `over time` key principles for the Data Warehouse, because
content designers are interested in:

1. Metrics for each content item that is or have been live in GOV.UK (around
   550K)
2. Trends of each of the metrics **over time**

To explain in detail why **over time** is important, let us explore three simple
examples.

### Example 1: Number of Content Items published by an organization

> departments are content owners; this means that they are responsible for

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Departments are content owners; this means that they are responsible for
```

also help to provide evidence about compliance to best practices and guidelines.

For example, we discourage departments from publishing content in PDF format.
There are many reasons for it, but having some metrics to prove it would
decrease the distance between the GOV.UK guidelines and department practices
when publishing content.

In the following example, we can see how there is a relationship between the
number of PDFs published by `Organisation A` and the `satisfaction score`.

![enforcing good practices][figure-3-comparisons]

### Example 3: Predictions

User interactions with content on GOV.UK can sometimes follow seasonal patterns.
If on a particular week or month of the year a set of pages receive a spike on
the number of visits, it is possible those pages will receive a similar number
of visits the following year during the same period.

Let's explore the following example:

As per the spike of visits in June last year, it is very likely that
`Organisation A` expects a spike in page views for a content item, so they might
consider reviewing in advance the content, so it is accurate and up to date.

![predictions][figure-4-predictions]

# Why a Data Warehouse

> ## State of the art

Reviewer: This section's structure and purpose make much more sense now! 

But the title is confusing, how about `Considerations for building new application`? 
"State of the art" doesn't make sense on its own and is closer to "the cutting edge" in meaning.

applications and data sources were good enough to fulfill our mission goals.

This is what we found out:

1. We don't have a single place to retrieve all metrics for content items. We
   currently store metrics for organizations (and dashboards) via the
   [performance platform](performance-platform), but the way it is structured
   and the scope of the product, make it not a good fit for our mission goal.

1. We store the number of page views in [Search][rummager], so when users search
   in GOV.UK the results are ordered by popularity; the way this information is
   collected [has been reported as Tech debt][ga-tech-debug-trello] and building
   this applpcation will enable [Search][rummager] to [use the API][api] and pay
   the tech debt.

1. Data Scientists find it difficult to get and link content and performance
   metrics. Having a single place to look for this information will make their
   daily work easier.

1. Performance Analysts dashboards will also benefit from having metrics from
   multiple sources because, although they have direct access to metrics from
   Google Analytics, they don't have direct access to Feedex or other internal

>    applications.

Reviewer: I think the numbering is incorrect.

Author: If you mean because they are all `1`; this is intended because [they are automatically ordered](https://guides.github.com/features/mastering-markdown/)

We concluded that we had to find custom way to store metrics and content
attributes through time, because the existing applications were more focused on
metrics and content characteristics for a single day.

## Tracking metrics through time in a Data Warehouse

Now that we have a better understanding of the needs behind tracking metrics at

> scale and through time, and the state of the art for the existing application,

Reviewer: scale and through time and ~~the state of the art for the existing~~ need for a new application,
